Here
[Music]
I go.
I need to release the brake
and that allows the stop uh to go
through.
So this whole unit I believe has been
here since when they first built the
building.
There were two prior owners to this
building going residential. It was
originally a stable. All the carriages
were on the ground floor and all the
horses came up because real estate even
over 100 years ago was so expensive. It
was cheaper to go up as opposed to go
wider.
Starting at the end of the Civil War up
until 1900,
this area was really the epicenter of
New York City. All the wealthier
citizens would have had carriages and
they would have needed to keep their
horses and stables relatively near their
homes. So there must have been quite a
few stables in the area. It was just
something that was central to the
culture.
One of the major reasons this area
started developing was the building of
the Fifth Avenue Hotel at the corner of
23rd and Fifth Avenue. The building with
the elevator would have been located
right about here. And then about a block
and a half away would have been the
Fifth Avenue Hotel. It occupied the
whole side of Broadway and Fifth Avenue
here. The building with the elevator was
probably built in 1888 and at that time
it was a five-story brick stable and the
owner was EA Darling who was connected
with the Fifth Avenue hotel. He was in
charge of buying all the food for the
hotel. So I think they were just
entrepreneurs and they saw opportunity
to invest and make some more money. The
elevator was new at that time. Before
the advent of the elevator, the higher
rooms were considered to be less
desirable because people had to walk up
all those stairs. But with the
introduction of elevators, they became
the most desirable rooms.
the latest.
We've been actually grandfathers,
but they passed a new safety law and I
think it's 2025. All of these will be
outlawed. So, we're just getting a jump
on it and trying to replace it now. I'm
sort of sorry to see it go. Although,
it'll be nice to have a push button
elevator.
Hello.
Hey. Good morning.
Morning. How are you, boy?
This is Tony. I'm Mark. Hi. Crew. Nice
to meet you. I don't want to shake your
hand. I'm already all dirty.
No problem.
I feel really sad. Really sad. Uh I love
this elevator. Been using it for 40
years or more actually. And I'm sorry to
see you go.
Would you like to do the honors?
Oh boy. Okay.
Here she goes.
Still shaking.
Yeah.
So, what are you guys doing this
morning?
This morning, I'm going to uh be hanging
this thing up above us, cutting the
cables off the elevator.
Oh, yeah.
So, this should be the last ride.
Should be the last time it runs on this
old power. That's
Wow.
Once we
The electrical cables,
all of them. Everything.
Everything.
The the hoist cables, the electrical
cables, everything. Everything comes
down.
Going into the basement.
Yes.
Well,
I think it's sad.
I know. It's bittersweet.
Yeah.
[Music]
Hi.
Mhm.
You know, change is very difficult in
its way. I I'm used to change. I
generally
welcome it.
[Music]
Every time I get into the elevator, I
think about the horses. I really do. And
what it must have been like to be in
that elevator with a 2,000 lb horse.
Very sobering.
This thing has been a part of my life
for a while now. It's It's surreal to
think that this is the last time I'm
going to do this. All
right. With the old in with the new one.
Yeah.
This one's different, though. I mean,
we've taken on a lot of elevators
before, but nothing nothing really like
that.
No. Nothing that was designed to haul
horses up and down.
Yeah.
And that's it. Last time it comes up on
its own power.
So, when Tony goes to go up at the
elevator, that's your knife switch. One
side of that is up, one side of that is
down. Tony, go up at the rope. Going up.
That'll rotate. Flop over. Make contact.
Up he goes.
Turns the motor, which turns the gear up
there. In the bottom there is a worm
gear. Looks like a screw. And on top, if
you look in the back, you'll see the
drum, which has the cables on it. That's
moving the car up and the counterwe down
at the same time.
This is the only one I've ever seen like
this in my whole career. As the rules
change and the laws change, it's harder
to make those old ones meet the new
codes. That's what happened here. At
this point, you can't meet new codes.
You can't do a break test on an elevator
like this. At some point, it's just
time. So, come back down, Tony.
So, now he's going to go the other way
with it.
This blue thing right here, this was
added later on. That's a modern a more
modern break than what it felt.
This thing freaking exploded. The motor
just blew up.
Ghost.
Amazing. What were the odds?
How far are you away from the top, Tony?
The motor just shorted.
Did a little more than spark.
It's like a reality show. We didn't even
plan for this.
No.
Good thing you're getting a new
elevator. Cuz if you weren't now you
would be.
Yes.
Can you climb out of the elevator at
all?
The motor shorted out. Yeah.
And he was coming down. He was in
downward flight for about 30 seconds and
then all of a sudden it went and that
was the end of it.
That adds a lot of complication to this
job. Like a lot.
Oh yeah. Yeah. I I I if if you can, I
think I need you to come here.
Gerard's coming. Chrissy's on his way.
We'll get this thing moving one way or
another.
All right.
So, what do we have here?
How you been?
Good to see you.
Yeah, good to see you.
You sad?
I am sad. I'm actually
I am too.
I am really sad to see this show.
She was just saying all these nice
things about it. That's like going down
with the woman down the uh aisle to get
married that she died of a heart attack.
Right.
Right. Right.
So it won't go at all.
No, I can't get it to go.
Flashlight.
I can't get it to go up or down right
now. Nothing.
After 150 years, you break the freaking
elevator.
I know. It's not my fault, but now it's
my problem.
Where's the hoist?
Uh in the elevator.
Elevator.
All right.
Go to work. Yeah,
you can run the platform down low.
Yeah. Yeah.
So, we came here yesterday to survey the
job. Um, there's challenges with this
one because of its age. So, in this age
bracket that I've been around, there's
definitely, I would say, less than a
dozen left total in the city. Uh, I've
put hands on three of them. I like that
there's not many of them. Who really
could say that they got to take an
elevator out like this? Most people in
our industry have never even seen an
elevator with a leather belt before.
I've showed people videos and pictures
of this thing throughout time and
they've never seen anything like it. So,
it's cool to be a part of something like
that and it's cool to possess the skills
and know how to work on this. I take a
lot of pride in the fact that our team
knows how to do this.
We deal with plumbing. We deal with
electricity. We deal with every aspect
of a building you could think of. We
have to dabble in it somehow. You can't
Google this stuff. Anybody that put
anything like this in has been dead
before I was born. Part of our job is
going to the job, engineering it in your
mind so you could figure out how this
thing comes apart and then doing it. But
it's the first time you'll ever do that
and probably the last time. But you have
to be really good at it. the one time
you do it.
Will you miss working on this elevator
in particular?
No, I will not. I I won't miss working
on this. No.
So, right now, the elevator is being
held up by an electric chain hoist.
We're going to lower the car down to the
basement. We're going to clear out the
cables that we just lowered down. Uh and
then from there, we will take off a wall
of the cab to start removing the
counterwes from the top to the bottom.
One by one, we'll take him out of the
rack and put him in the elevator with us
until the counterweights are removed.
The elevator's last ride was when it
came up. There's no power going to the
elevator right now. The main line is
out, locked out, so no one else could
touch it. And now it's just being
manually ran by a hoist, only by
elevator personnel.
[Music]
There's a part of me, of course, that's
very happy,
[Music]
but I miss it.
And I knew I was going to miss it.
It's very bittersweet.
[Music]